with the Texas Department of Community Affairs is
Larry Crumpton. Larry was one of the early
staffers, right after Shanahan probably left or
right around in there, worked in housing. And now
he's a deputy over at Texas Department of
Community Affairs. But Larry has been over there
for a number of years and could describe for you,
probably in more detail, actually that
certification process. But that certification
process, if I remember correctly, was sort of
instituted around 72, maybe 73. And it was the
official certification of planners. And in order
to obtain any of the local planning assistance,
you had to be certified and to assure that you did
quality work. So I'll have to yield to either Larry
over there. There were several other people that
worked around with this.
Charles Englishby is one staff person, I think,
over at TDCA that you might ask about that. Another
question. Would you describe the Texas 2000
program a bit, and what that was supposed to
achieve, and who the guiding lights were, and why
it was awarded to the LBJ School of Public Affairs?
Or would you, I don't know if you were close to that
program or not, Leon. OK. OK, let me try to. pass on
as best I can some of the history of that. And this is
trying to dredge up a little bit because I never was
actually one of the key participants in it. As I
understand it, as Governor Briscoe was involved
in announcing his State of the State in 1979,
he did indicate
that there needed to be a created Texas 2000 type
project to project to the year 2000 what we were
going to be faced with. That's Governor Briscoe.
My understanding was that it was a brainchild of
someone over at the University of Texas, and I
can't really identify the key people that might
have brought that up at that time. I think it might
have been the chap from Philadelphia who has since
left the faculty. Well, I'm not sure. I do know that
there were several.
Granowski has been mentioned as a person that's
been involved in the thinking of some of that.
Walt Rostow has been mentioned as a person that was
very interested in some of this. Walt, I think, has
done a lot of work in water issues and water
problems. So I don't know exactly who might have
generated it to Governor Briscoe, but it was
mentioned. In fact, Governor Briscoe made sure
that people remembered that, hey, I mentioned
this. But it was really, I guess, Governor
Clements that, through his work, you know,
drilling company experience of being able to, you
know, the one thing about Governor Clements was
that you talk about short and mid-range planning,
it was sort of a waste of time. But, you know, when
you start talking about long-range planning, his
eyes lit up because he clearly was appalled at the
amount of data and information that the state
government had and trying to recognize our
position in the world affairs and he was extremely
concerned about what we would need to be doing in
order to deal with the year 2000 and beyond. And I
think that was one of the key things that Governor
Clements did, is that he felt so strongly about
that that he pushed extremely hard on the Texas
2000 project. Early, fairly early in his
administration, and I have to draw some dates to
kind of, benchmark it, but came into office in 69. I
think it was really probably in the spring of 70 by
the time we began recognizing the governor really
wanted to do something in this and began pushing on
it. Dr. Vic Arnold out of the LBJ school was brought
over on a part-time basis initially. And then
shortly thereafter, some period of time
thereafter, it was a deal cut and so forth, and Vic
was brought over full time. Vic was from
Minneapolis, wasn't he? I believe so, as a
planning director in Minnesota. And had pulled
off several planning initiatives that were
similar, not just like it, but similar kinds of
activities. a projections program, that kind of
thing. And Vic was a very articulate, or is a very
articulate guy. And you might, let me. But the
Texas 2000 project, Vic Arnold, part of the,
quote, keystones of that was that we were going to
have state agencies, loan staff, to assist Vic and
to pull off the project. That's the way it started.
I had the Texas Advisory Commission on
Intergovernmental Relations loaned a staff
person almost full time. The comptroller, the
general land office were all people. Bob
Armstrong, at the time, was interested, of
course, in that type project. And a number of
people. There was a conference here on it at the
Thompson Center, as I recall. There was
initially, they began trying to structure the
project. Ultimately, there was a Texas 2000
commission formed. And the commission members
were blue ribbon type private sector people, as
well as key people like Senator Jones from the
legislature,
Senate finance chairman. And it was a very strong
blue ribbon type group. There are still staff
people around that worked on that. Vic Arnold, by
the way, has since gone to the University of Texas
Bureau of Business Research, heads up that
particular entity, and would be very interested
in explaining
the good things that did occur there. As, again, I
mentioned, he's very articulate, was able to work
through bureaucracy very well, wrote well, and
did some good work. In fact, there are some still
pieces of his work that I'm sure he's still
involved with over at Bureau of Business
Research, because he's still very interested. We
have little components of Texas 2000 still a part
of our office. The data program that was sort of
instituted working with Bureau of Census and
trying to do some projections. And so some of that
is still a part of our office. And it was really some
of that Texas 2000. In order to do much
projections, you've got to have a database. And I
think the database development and things like
that are things that we're still struggling with
trying to get a handle on that. Speaking of that, we
understand that there are several state agencies
that have made population and economic
projections and that there is no one forecast or
series of projections that the state uses. Would
you like to comment on that state of affairs, for
example, on water resources and so forth? There
are a number of state agencies that do population
projections. And primarily, they do it for their
purposes.
always look at the projections and see that the
highway department is going to have a set, the
water resource is going to have a set, the health
department has a set. They tend to try to prove
either that they need a whole lot of additional
whatevers or the fact that the problems aren't
that great, depending on where they stand. It is a
very political issue. Governor Briscoe got
killed. early on in his administration, 1973 or
late in 73 or 74, wound up being in some little town
in South Texas and making a speech. And he just, we
just released a set of the population
projections. And it essentially said that little
town was not going to exist in five years. And I tell
you there, you know, subsequent, you could not
bring that up to that administration. Population
projection was a no-no. It was ultimately the
demise. At that time, we had a governor's office of
information services. Over 100 employees
working with trying to develop compatibility of
computers among state agencies and dealing with a
lot of different issues and database.
Essentially, that agency was eliminated shortly
thereafter. Over 100 employees. passed away. And
so
there really has not been an official set of
projections since that time. There were some
efforts under Governor Clements to develop into
some projections. We never really reached an
ultimate set that everybody used. It continues to
be something that, of course, When you have a
census like 1980 census, at least you have a
benchmark. From 70, our data was real weak by the
time you got to 78, 79. There are several things you
talk about here. You talk about projections, but
you also talk about estimates. Because until you
have the decennial census, you're flapping
around out there trying to make some real
unprofessional judgments. Well, we're going to
be saved by the new 1985 census, which will just be a
head count, just an enumeration. But at least it
will give us a midpoint benchmark. We have on the
agenda of trying to move into the projections
area, we realize that it still is a political
issue. But having at least our office is
established as the data center. And we do get the
most up-to-date information from the Bureau of
Census at a national level. We are trying to even
make better use of the products that we get out of
the census and different analysis of that data.
Right now, we're doing a little innovative
project that's not a real pure planning project,
but you've got to have data. I think that's one of
the key things that we're trying to work on right
now, is that we have recently provided a
microcomputer to each of the 24 COGs. It was an
effort to try to at least provide both a technical
link but also a philosophical link between the
regional planning commissions in our office We
are beginning to try to use that linkage between
our office to share on our little floppy disk
different kinds of data sets for each region, both
in terms of information from the census
department, but also information that we can gen
up A&M,
There's a department over A&M is actually our
technical expertise on the data center. Are you
all familiar with that? Probably rural
sociology. Murdoch? Steve Murdoch is the
contact. And his shop does a lot of the technical
work for us. But we're really trying to use the,
quote, microcomputer to move on into the 20th
century. do some of this work. Kent, by the way, is
working with our prime in our college, and about as
much as any student. Aren't you the assistant to
Terry? I'm an assistant to Terry, and I've worked
with the Army, utilizing the same kind of process,
except with military installations instead of
COGS. Same type of process. We're working on that.
We have, at the present time in our department now,
Times have changed, Leon. We have four different
types of microbes in our office. And we're going to
get a fifth. In fact, we're getting two different.
We're going to end up with six different types of
microbes in our department, beginning with crash
80s.
We wound up recognizing that there are so many
different types of hardware floating around. and
so many different types of software and
incompatibility and so forth. We began trying to
analyze where all the COGs were, and they did have
different kinds of, you know, they had IBM PCs and
they had, you know, some of them had IBM minis and,
you know, on them different kinds of pieces of
hardware. But we just finally bit the bullet and
purchased a TI. We went out for bid and so forth, but
we purchased a TI professional computer with 256K
and a dual floppy disk and some of that type stuff so
that we now at least have a minimal level piece of
equipment in each of the COGs. And we can begin
where our key use of that is going to be trying to
develop our telecommunication network on our
review process. When we're reviewing
applications for federal funds, They're
actually extensions of our office, and we're
reviewing local projects. They're going to be
providing that information back to us about
what's going through their organizations. But we
also see the micro as a first step to really an
interactive communication between all 24 in our
office on economic development. Because I think,
as we said about a year ago, economic development
is going to be Mark White's key concern in trying to
deal with economic development matters. He
created a separate division of the governor's
office. Hardin-Wiedemann is now heading up. And
it's the key issue that he will deal with. What
brought about the change in the state planning
officer? Hardin used to be the state planning
officer. OK. The key interest was that while we had
that office called the Office of Planning and
Intergovernmental Relations, we had about 20
person staff, 22 person or so, that while we had
that organization and then we had the budget
office, it was very clear that to really deal with
economic development matters, there's going to
have to be some dedicated staff, hardened I don't
know if you recall some of his background, but his
background is tailored very well to economic
development matters. He's worked on an
international scene. He knows and speaks fluent
French, German, I think, several different
languages, and has actually developed, was
working with the National Democratic Party out of
Washington and had a lot of fundraisers for the
party. So he's dealt in circles of the economic
development industry. Was he involved with his
business in Dallas too? He was involved in
financial community in Dallas and things. So he
just had the background. And we began trying to
service Governor White out of that Office of
Planning and Intergovernmental Relations. that
staff team really did the early work for getting
MCC in Austin. But what we found is that trying to
deal with those kinds of issues, it took almost
100% of the time. I mean, you could just chew up a lot
of different man hours in that area and not really
go on about the business of trying to go beyond
that. So Governor White decided to create a
separate division in the governor's office and
add focus. And so Hardin took that on. What is Bob's
background? Bob McPherson started working in the
governor's office, this governor's office, back
in 1970 or 69. Was involved in manpower planning at
the time.
quite extensive interest, very strong interest
in planning and background in planning business.
Worked with the Department of Labor for a while.
Worked in Seattle, I believe it was, and
Washington State in the planning business there.
Private or public? Publicly financed. I'm not
sure how it was structured. I don't know if it was in
a public agency. I don't know if it
was publicly financed. Who was the Carter's
laborer? Ray Marshall. Ray Marshall came back
after the Carter administration ended over at
University of Texas. That's where he came from
anyway, came back there. And Bob became a key
advisor to Ray Marshall over at the University of
Texas. And as Governor White came into office and
began trying to establish, since manpower
business was going through a great transition
from the old CETA program to the Job Training
Partnership Act, Bob was a key advisor to
Marshall. And so he became a key advisor to
Governor White sort of contractual basis to
establish this new program in Texas. And so we just
moved on over really later full time. And so
Governor White has used him as a key advisor for job
training. And at the time all this transition was
going on, Bob became sort of a natural to move into
the director of planning job. What is the status of
state planning today? Does the governor's office
have a plan for planning or a strategy for
planning? Or what does the governor want done in
terms of the state's role in planning Texas today?
That's one thing that I was hoping Bob could speak
to. And I hate to answer boring there. We'll ask
him, too. We can compare notes and see if we believe
the same thing.
We do want to create something that would be very,
very important. I think Governor White is very
interested in reinstituting planning. We look
back and see that we've lost ground in a number of
years. We do feel that Like the Texas 2000 project
was a valuable project to a certain extent. It was
truly a Blue Ribbon project type, Blue Ribbon
committee type project, but really did not get
involvement or citizens being involved in the
process. And Governor White is a much more
citizen-oriented, people-oriented governor.
And while he appreciates and wants the views of
influential people, I think this administration
will look more toward, OK, now that's what these
folks, under the 2000 project, that's what they
thought. Now let's go beyond. 2000, under its
process, only dealt with about, I won't go back,
but six or seven key issues, all oriented around
the economy. all oriented around energy, water,
and key issues that were mostly those things that
you must have, quote, and to deal with 2000. There
was no concern or there was no
dealing with human service problems. What will
our needs be as far as the people? What are our
health problems? There was a human service side
was something totally left out. I think Governor
White has expressed interest in trying to make
sure that our planning and our activity deals with
people as well as the physical assets of the state.
There's only a certain amount of time left in his
term of office before he has to stand for
reelection or whatever. I think Governor White is
looking beyond a year and a half or so. I think he
probably feels that in order to lay good
groundwork, it's going to take some time. And I
think that he believes that he's probably got six
or seven more years to solve the state's problems.
He's certainly not dealing with things and saying
that I only have a term of two years left. There are
key things that we're moving out on right now, but
we're trying to, I think Bob will tell you that
we're moving slowly. We're trying to
re-establish some of the basic premises that we
had in the early years. One effort right now that we
have a policy paper out on that we might share with
you, health planning is an issue that's been
around since day one I entered and here we are back
in trying to restructure, quote, health planning
in Texas. And we have a paper that I think will begin
showing you what we do believe as far as planning
concepts. There are some guidelines that we began
establishing in there that I think you will find
reflective of what we're trying to accomplish.
We're not going to have the blue ribbon, big splash
committees that we deal with at the state level. I
think the efforts that we make, we're going to be
trying to look at local involvement. And we're
going to be trying to deal with broad sectors of
issues like health, like jobs. We're going to be
dealing with those. Economic development
obviously hardened division down there. They're
going to have an economic development plan that's
going to carve out a swatch. You're talking about
services, mainly, and a certain amount of
analysis. But it strikes me that the pendulum has
swung completely to the opposite extreme from
physical environmental planning, because you
haven't mentioned that at all as part of the State
Planning Office's expected realm of activities.
Am I wrong in assuming that the state has gotten
completely away from that aspect of state
planning?
Bob, I think the agenda is still open for, quote,
the natural resource type planning, interagency
planning activities. Obviously, again, we've
got the functional planning in each of our natural
resource type agencies. But with the end of TNRAC,
that is a policy area that is not, on an interagency
basis, it's not linked up. It is an area that I think
Governor White is ultimately going to have to
shore up. Is the staff here moving in that
direction at all, in terms of making
recommendations?
I think so. It's just not as clear in that area right
now as some of the other areas. There's been
pressures and other things that have forced us
into several issues that we've got that we feel
like it's very much on our plate. Economic
development does, to a great extent, pick up quite
a few pieces. But water, for example, is a key area.
that the governor right now is working with both
sides of the legislature, with the Water
Resources Department, and that area right there,
it hits at the heart of the matter. We've got the
development types that want all the water that the
state can use to develop our state, and you've got
the environmentalists that say, hey, you've got
to be concerned about aquifers and other
problems. So we've got We've got that issue right
before us. But trying to create a council or trying
to deal with a group that can really get a handle on
that, that's still out. I think the jury's still
out there. I do not think, I guess this is my staff
perspective, I do not see Mark White creating a
comprehensive planning function to where it's
all tied together in a neat little package. I see
him dealing with health. I see him dealing with
economic development. I see him dealing with the
whole arena of jobs and services for the poor and
planning in that area. Natural resources is one
that we've got to deal with and will. I feel very
confident. But trying then to overarch that is
where I'm not sure where Governor White will . I'm
just wondering if, because we've been talking
about the goals for Texas and how that did bring all
these major concerns together, if that might not
be a framework that you might take a look at in tying
together the economic and the resource concerns
and the human services concerns. Well, goals for
Texas were certainly an issue looked at early in
the White administration because Ed Grisham
became the governor's key program guy. And he was,
as I mentioned earlier, the lead person for
Governor Smith under Dan Petty to do the old goals
program. So he very much favored that type effort.
That was certainly looked at. I think the Texas
2000 project was looked at as a model. And I think
both of those. are things that we will try to glean
the pieces of. But I do not see right now another
Goldsboro program. I do not see another Texas
2000. But I think there are little pieces of those
things that will be drawn together in an overall
program. I think Bob. probably needs to also add to
this, because he's done a lot of thinking in the
area. As director of planning now, it's certainly
a concern that he's been toying with. And he's been
getting a lot of input from a lot of different
folks. And I think he'll be the first to say that
we're trying to establish a complete planning
program. I think he wants to start slow. He wants to
try to make sure that the planning that's done is
planning that will have results at the end. I think
he's very concerned about a paper shuffle
planning process where it really doesn't pan out.
This is a good point, because if we have another
award winning planning program, that doesn't
lead anywhere, and another Texas 2000 blue ribbon
high pressure committee that doesn't seem to lead
anywhere, then people are going to become very
wary of programs that don't have any payoff. And
it's that sort of thing that I think that we as
planners have to guard against. And in that sense,
I think Bob deserves a lot of support in being quite
cautious about moving ahead and making sure that
what is done can be quite visible in terms of its
payoff. I think Bob is that type of person. I think
he studies and reviews. And he's a person with
depth. And he looks at that. And I think once he gets
settled on where he wants to go, I think we'll see a
very strong program. But I think we're still in
that. Bob came on effectively around October 1 and
began the process of trying to acclimate into that
position. And I think we've been trying to grow and
understand the perspective of state government.
I think once we get rolling, it'll be a real strong
program.